# CREATest

## Replication package for the paper "Introducing CREATest: a framework for test case generation in itemis CREATE", submitted to ICTSS 2025

This repository contains the replication package for the paper "Introducing CREATest: a framework for test case generation in itemis CREATE", submitted to ICTSS 2025. The package contains the following artifacts:

* `CREATest`: folder containing the source code of the CREATest tool.
* `dist`: folder containing the compiled version of the CREATest tool (`CREATest-0.0.3.jar`), together with the needed libraries (e.g., EvoSuite)
* `experiments`: folder containing all the scripts, executables, and models used for the ecxperimental evaluation of the tool.
    - `CREATestExperiments`: folder containing a Maven project with utilities for data collection.
    - `benchmark`: folder containing the models used in the evaluation of the paper.
    - `generated-tests-whole-suite` and `generated-tests-dynamosa`: folders containing the test suite generated by the tool for the benchmark models using whole suite test generation and many objective test generation, respecitvely.
    - `data-whole-suite` and `data-dynamosa`: folders containing the experimental data (from whole suite test generation and many objective test generation, respecitvely) in csv and xlsx formats.

## How to use the CREATest tool

### Requirements

The tool has the following requirements:

* A machine with a Windows operating system installed and at least 22MB of
free hard disk space.
* Java Development Kit (JDK) version 9 installed on the machine. The
JDK is available for the download [here](https://www.oracle.com/it/java/technologies/javase/javase9-archive-downloads.html).
* A working Eclipse-based installation of itemis CREATE (both standalone and Eclipse plug-in are supported). The supported versions of itemis CREATE are 5.2.x (the correct functioning of the tool is not guaranteed with different versions of itemis CREATE). itemis CREATE is available under license.
No feature provided by the professional license is required to use the tool, so the standard license is sufficient. The installation of itemis CREATE comes with an evaluation license that is valid for 30 days. Licenses are available at [the official itemis website](https://www.itemis.com/en/products/itemis-create/licenses/).
itemis CREATE can be downloaded after filling out the form available at [the itemis CREATE download page](https://info.itemis.com/products/itemis-create/download/).
* A directory named `libs` containing the dependencies as JAR files. The `libs` directory must be located in the same directory of `Createst-0.0.3.jar` and its content is available in the `dist/libs.zip` file available in this replication package. The required dependencies are:
    - ANTLR Runtime version 3.3,
    - Apache Commons CLI version 1.6.0,
    - EvoSuite version 1.2.0,
    - JUnit version 4.13.2,
    - JavaParser Core version 3.25.6,
    - StringTemplate version 4.0.2,
    - ZeroTurnaround ZIP version 1.17.

### CLI

The CREATest tool can be used by the user via a command line interface (CLI).
The following options are required:

* `-s <arg>`, `--sccPath <arg>`: the absolute path to the `scc.bat` file contained in the itemis CREATE installation, used for Java code generation from CREATE statecharts.
* `-y <arg>`, `--yscPath <arg>`: the absolute path of the CREATE statechart file. It must have .ysc extension.

The following options are optional:

* `-h`, `--help`: print the help message, regardless of other options.
* `-b <arg>`, `--evoSearchBudget <arg>`: the EvoSuite search budget, expressed in seconds. It must be a positive integer.
* `-g`, `--genArtifacts`: generate a .zip containing all the artifacts produced during the process.
* `-e`, `--runExperiments`: execute an extra time the generation process skipping the Java simplification phase. For experimental purposes.

If an input option provided by the user is incorrect (e.g. the specified source file does not exist) or one of the required options is missing, a message describing the error is displayed.

#### Usage

Once all the requirements are met, the CREATest tool can be used. It is sufficient to run the CREATest JAR with the appropriate options. At the end of the run, a .sctunit file containing the SCTUnit test class will be created in the folder containing the JAR.

If the `-g` option is used, a .zip file is also created. After decompressing the .zip file, the resulting directory can be opened as a workspace with itemis CREATE. The workspace contains a project with all the produced artefacts. In itemis CREATE, the CREATE statechart can be opened and the SCTUnit test class can be executed. To fix the compilation errors in the project, it is necessary to add the EvoSuite 1.2.0 jar as a dependency of the project. The JUnit test class must be runned with JUnit 4 as test runner and Java JDK 9 as runtime JRE.

### Input statechart limitations

It is not recomended to use characters that are not the underscore or alphanumeric characters in the statechart definition section or in states and regions. It is also discuraged the use of Java and SCTUnit keywords. Especially in the namespace, the use of such characters or keywords may lead to the failure of the tool.

## EvoSuite configuration

In the following, we provide a brief overview of some of EvoSuite's options and parameters considered for configuring EvoSuite within CREATest:

* `-Dtarget_method=<arg>` and `-Dtarget_method_list=<arg>` allow specifying the methods for which tests should be generated. Unfortunately, we were unable to get these parameters to work with either version 1.0.6 (the version available in the [official download page](https://www.evosuite.org/downloads)) or version 1.2.0 (the [latest available release](https://github.com/EvoSuite/evosuite/releases/tag/v1.2.0)). These issues have been discussed [in this GitHub issue](https://github.com/EvoSuite/evosuite/issues/261) for version 1.0.6 and [this one](https://github.com/EvoSuite/evosuite/issues/439) for version 1.2.0. To achieve a similar functionality, CREATest automatically modify the visibility of the members of the target Java class.
* `-generateSuite`, `-generateMOSuite`, `-generateRandom`, `-generateSuiteUsingDSE` options are mutually exclusive and specify the strategy and algorithm used by EvoSuite. These options serve as shorthand for setting `-Dstrategy` and `-Dalgorithm`, which, when used directly, allow selecting from wider ranges of strategies and algorithms. `-generateMOSuite` is the default since version 1.1.0. We have conducted experiments on the presented benchmark using `-generateSuite` and `-generateMOSuite`, with the latter resulting in a lower number of SCTUnit test cases with errors or failures but a slightly worse performance in terms of Statechart coverage. In the paper, we present the results of the execution uding the `-generateMOSuite` option, which is equivalent to setting `-Dstrategy=MOSUITE` and `-Dalgorithm=DYNAMOSA`.
* `-criterion` allows specifying one or more coverage criteria from a set of 23 available criteria, which are used in the fitness functions used for test generation. The selected critera in our configuration are: No-Exception Top-Level Method Coverage, Branch Coverage, and Method-Output Coverage. The first ensures that all public methods (including all methods that raises input events) are called at least once in a valid state and with valid parameters. Branch Coverage is chosen because branches in the Java implementation often correspond to transitions and ``being in a state'' in the Statechart. Method-Output Coverage helps to ensure that methods used to check, for example, that the state machine is active are evaluated as both true and false in the test suite. A brief, non-exhaustive evaluation showed that this configuration yielded better performance compared to both the default and other alternatives.
* `-Dsearch_budget=<arg>` sets the maximum search duration. In CREATest, this can be set using the `-b <arg>` or `--evoSearchBudget <arg>` command-line argument.

We also found that changing the value of a parameter in the configuration can lead to higher coverage for the implementation of some Statecharts, while resulting in poorer performance for others. Therefore, an optimal configuration for our purposes that is the best across all cases may not exist.

Within CREATest, the call to EvoSuite is equivalent to the following command-line invocation:
```
java -jar evosuite-1.2.0.jar -class my.package.MyClass -projectCP path\to\project\bin -generateMOSuite -criterion BRANCH:METHODNOEXCEPTION:OUTPUT
```

We acknowledge that there may be configurations that perform better overall than the one we adopted. However, the lack of comprehensive documentation and the large number of possible configurations make identifying such configurations challenging.

An alternative approach could involve refining EvoSuite to include a coverage criterion more tailored to Statecharts. However, this would compromise one of the core strengths of the CREATest approach: leveraging off-the-shelf components to build a fully functional abstract test generator with relatively low development effort.
